PySAS Workbench 0.4.0-preview.21
==============================

1. Extract the ENTIRE ZIP to a writable folder on your Windows computer.
2. Place your EGP project, SAS programs, Schedule.xlsx, and _*.sas init files
   beside pysas.py in that folder. You can also copy the UI files into your
   existing workspace, including the updated pysas.py 0.3.12. Keep your SAS,
   EGP and Excel files. The updated engine remains a standalone single file.
3. Double-click START_PYSAS.bat. PySAS opens in its own app-style window.
4. The terminal closes after startup. Closing the app stops the watcher
   from taking new files and lets active jobs finish before the server exits.

Requirements
------------
- Windows with Python 3.10+ and SAS Enterprise Guide configured for your SAS
  environment. This ZIP does not bundle Python or SAS Enterprise Guide.
- openpyxl is needed for schedules and Excel exports/previews. If it is not
  already installed, use your approved installation process, or run:
      py -3 -m pip install openpyxl
- Microsoft Edge or Google Chrome supplies the app window (no tabs/address bar).
- No Node.js, npm, Git, administrator access, or UI dependencies are needed.
  Once existing Python/SAS requirements are met, the workbench works offline.

App window and browser option
-----------------------------
START_PYSAS.bat now opens a dedicated PySAS window using Microsoft Edge (or
Google Chrome if Edge is unavailable). There are no browser tabs or address
bar. The app uses its own local profile under .pysas-ui/app-profile and does
not use your personal browser profile. This is still the portable Python ZIP;
Python and an installed Edge/Chrome are required, with no new UI installation.

PySAS has its own blue taskbar icon and a separate identity for each workspace.
Different extracted versions can run side by side in different folders.
The terminal closes once the window opens. Startup errors are saved in
.pysas-ui/launcher.log. START_PYSAS_CONSOLE.bat keeps a troubleshooting console.
Closing the app or choosing Quit app finishes current jobs before exiting.

To use a normal browser instead, double-click START_PYSAS_BROWSER.bat or run:
  py -3 pysas_ui.py --browser

In normal browser mode, use Quit app to stop the background server; simply
closing a browser tab leaves it running. If no supported app browser is found,
the launcher stays open with an error. Use the browser launcher in that case.
macOS/Linux keep the previous default-browser behavior.

What is included
----------------
- Running filenames and elapsed time updated every second.
- Runner, watcher, schedule, schedule continuation, bundles, and EGP tools.
- Scheduler task statuses, individual task clocks, and total schedule duration.
- Run history, searchable statuses, console, SAS logs/code and file downloads.
- Excel previews (up to 100 data rows, 30 columns and 10 sheets per workbook).
- Standalone pysas.py 0.3.12; existing CLI commands still work.
- Blue styling and saved code folders for repeated bundle operations.
- Always-run shared setup is prepended before every scheduled program.
- Watcher _*.sas files are shared initialization, never queued as jobs.
- Files & folders: input locations, multi-file uploads and Keep PC awake.

Folders, uploads and keep-awake
------------------------------
Use Files & folders to set existing folders for project inputs, shared _*.sas
initialization files and the watcher inbox. Finish jobs and stop the watcher
before changing folders. Leave the defaults to keep your previous workflow.

Upload multiple files from the same page. Initialization filenames must start
with _. Upload these before jobs: files uploaded to a running watcher can start
immediately. Files are copied locally, up to 512 MB each. Duplicate filenames
are rejected; existing files are not replaced.

The watcher uses _*.sas from the shared folder plus the inbox, in alphabetical
filename order. --lib (or the override dropdown) still replaces this list with
one selected initialization file. Defaults still use files beside pysas.py.

Keep PC awake prevents Windows idle sleep and display timeout while enabled.
It does not click/type, override manual sleep or closing the lid, or bypass
organization screen-lock policies. It resets when the server closes.

Scheduler always_run rows define shared setup, prepended in workbook order
before each normal program in the same submission. Sections or row ranges apply. Explicit
skip disables a definition. Continuation keeps shared setup enabled.

Bundle folders
--------------
In Bundles & EGP, paste a full code-folder path and click Save path. Choose
between your saved folders using the dropdown. Pack reads SAS files there;
verify compares against that folder; unpack restores into it with backups.
Relative bundle/output filenames are resolved in the selected code folder.
Leave the code-folder field blank to use the workspace. Remove saved path
only removes the shortcut, never your files. Paths are saved per workspace.

Notes for this preview
----------------------------
The UI listens only on 127.0.0.1. Your files are not uploaded to a hosted UI.
SAS still uses your existing Enterprise Guide server connection.

The UI monitors commands started in the UI. Existing completed runs are read
from disk, but commands started separately in a terminal are not monitored
live. Run one UI launcher and one watcher per workspace.

SAS logs and Enterprise Guide console output appear when the existing engine
writes them, generally when each job finishes. Elapsed clocks and start/finish
states are live, but this is not live streaming of SAS statements.

Legacy schedule folders have per-task durations, but do not record total
wall-clock time. The UI shows a dash for that total rather than adding up
parallel task durations. New UI schedule runs retain the actual total time.

The UI stores command history in .pysas-ui. An interrupted run with no final
status is marked Unknown; check its console and output before rerunning.
History lists up to 500 run folders and 200 commands. Run inspectors list up
to 1,000 files. Very large workspaces may take longer to refresh.

Schedule dependencies remain managed in Excel. There is no calendar-based
scheduler or dependency graph editor. Stop file is available for each active
file; it ends the owned local automation process.

The interface and adapter are tested automatically on Windows, macOS and
Linux. Actual SAS execution needs testing on your Windows/Enterprise Guide
installation; it cannot be integration-tested without that environment.

Advanced
--------
Use a different existing workspace:
  py -3 pysas_ui.py --workspace "C:\your\workspace"

Use a fixed local port:
  py -3 pysas_ui.py --port 8765

macOS/Linux can preview the UI, inspect history, and use bundle/EGP tools:
  python3 pysas_ui.py
SAS execution is only available on Windows.

Project: https://github.com/daniel-vital-de-alcantara/pysas-toolkit

Earlier preview improvements
--------------------------
- Fixed garbled Windows-encoded code previews; new code exports use UTF-8.
- Inspect refreshes running files/logs automatically and shows latest output.
- The experimental live-log mode was removed after reports of hanging runs.
  UI and CLI use the standard bridge. Full SAS logs are available after EG
  exports them; console stages show run/save/close progress while active.
- Elapsed counters no longer reset on status polls. Folder scans run in the
  background, and completion does not wait for inherited output pipes.
- Stop file ends only that file's local automation. Remote SAS cancellation
  is not guaranteed; partial outputs may remain. Other files keep running,
  subject to the scheduler's existing dependencies and stop-on-error rules.
- Download bundle appears on each successful bundle command.

Preview.15 scheduler repair
--------------------------
- One scheduler, with 10 parallel tasks by default in the UI.
- Uses the actual supplied Rich-terminal 0.3.2 as the execution reference.
- Restores the original program's SAS server assignment and named-section
  extraction; previous UI versions could submit the entire program instead.
- Always-run sections/ranges are prepended in workbook order to each target.
  They appear as Shared setup, never as separate running tasks.
- Restores SAS stop-on-error options and the isolated task working directory.
- Running rows show section/rows, setup and execution stage beside the clock.
- Tests compare real Windows VBScript submissions with the supplied reference.
  Actual Enterprise Guide/SAS server execution still needs your environment.

Preview.16 changes
-----------------
- Stop schedule is available on each active schedule card and in Console.
  It prevents new launches and stops that schedule's active files.
  Other schedules and watchers keep working. Stopped results remain available
  in History, and Continue can resume the remaining work.
- Skipped files wait for their dependencies. For A -> B (skipped) -> C,
  C starts only after A succeeds. This works through longer skipped chains.
  A failed or cancelled ancestor blocks dependent files, even across skips.

Preview.17 changes
-----------------
- Each completed or stopped schedule now includes schedule.log: one file with
  all available task SAS logs and console output, in workbook order.
- Task sections include program, section/rows, status and elapsed time.
- Use Download schedule log on the schedule card or inside Console, or find
  schedule.log under Logs when inspecting the full schedule in History.
- Downloads contain the full file even when the on-screen preview is limited.

Saved data and timing estimates (preview.18)
------------------------------------------
Files & folders now exports/restores saved-data ZIPs. Finish active jobs and
stop the watcher first. Restores preserve existing run folders and replace
folder settings. External input folders and queued jobs are not included.
For your first upgrade, copy the new app files into your existing workspace
while PySAS is closed, keeping .pysas-ui, runs and runner/runs; then export.

Estimate time reads successful past runs by program and section/row selection.
Schedule totals account for dependencies and parallelism. A + means some work
has unknown timing. Estimates are approximate total durations, not a guarantee.
Inspect any saved run to download its entire folder as a ZIP.
Existing execution behavior is retained; the single-file engine is now 0.3.12.

Parameters editor (preview.19)
------------------------------
In Runner & watcher > Run a SAS program, enable "Use parameters for this run".
Type or paste your SAS macro definitions, or load a .sas file into the editor.
The order is shared initialization, then the editor contents, then your program.
Run program uses the current editor text, including unsaved edits.

Save parameter file stores a reusable named list separately from shared _*.sas
initialization. Load saved file replaces the editor with that saved list. The
last saved selection is remembered. Turning off parameters runs the usual way.
Saved lists are included in saved-data backups; existing lists are preserved
under separate names when a restored list has conflicting content.

Each launched job receives its own snapshot. Later edits cannot change that
job. Inspect its run folder to see parameters/<filename>.sas, even after a
successful run. Loading a local .sas file copies it into the editor and does
not edit, move or remove the original file. If migrating an old _cases.sas
from shared initialization, move the original out of that folder yourself so
it no longer applies globally to other jobs.

CLI equivalent: py pysas.py runner run extract.sas --parameters cases.sas
The watcher and scheduler keep their existing setup and execution behavior.

Servers tab (preview.20)
-----------------------
Choose an EGP connection and click Refresh snapshot to save a library/table
catalog. Shared initialization assigns the libraries first; an optional override
and library filter are available. Browse storage, reported row counts, creation
and modification dates, even after disconnecting from SAS. Unknown metadata stays
unknown; library totals say At least when sizes are missing. This is table disk
storage, not RAM. WORK, SASHELP and SASUSER are excluded. No shared folder is needed.
Snapshots are included in saved-data backups and can be downloaded as JSON.

Copy from Inspect (preview.21)
------------------------------
Select a log or SAS/text file and click Copy next to Download. The entire file
is copied, including lines outside the visible preview. Paste into Copilot or
another app. Copied confirms success; click again for newly written log output.
